Subject: Action Required: Employee Configuration Data Issue — Null split_amount for Percentage Splits Causing Payroll Processing Failure

Hi Team,

During payroll processing, we encountered a production exception while persisting payroll hierarchy data.

The failure is caused by an employee configuration where split_by is set to Percentage, but the corresponding split_amount is coming through as null.

Based on the current processing logic, when split_by = Percentage, the split_amount is expected to be a valid numeric value. In the employee configurations reviewed so far, we are seeing three possible values for split_amount:

0, 100, and null

The null value is not expected for percentage-based splits and is causing the processor to fail with a NullPointerException.

have attached the employee configuration details for reference. Please review the source employee configuration data and confirm why split_amount is coming as null for percentage-based splits.

Requested action:

Please validate and correct the employee configuration so that all records with split_by = Percentage have a valid split_amount, preferably 0 or 100 as per the expected configuration rules.

Also, please confirm whether null is ever expected from the upstream/source system for percentage splits. If yes, we need a clear business rule on how the processor should interpret it. Otherwise, this should be corrected at the source/configuration level before payroll processing.

Hi Team,

During payroll processing, we encountered a production validation failure caused by an employee configuration that is not aligned with the expected split configuration rules.

The issue is related to employee direct deposit split configuration. For employees where split_by is set to Percentage, the corresponding split_amount is expected to be populated with a valid numeric value. Based on the employee configurations reviewed so far, we are seeing the following values for split_amount:

0
100
null

The null value is not expected for percentage-based splits.

The processor failed with the following exception:

Cannot invoke "java.lang.Integer.intValue()" because the return value of 
"Split.getSplitAmount()" is null

The failure occurs in the percentage calculation logic where the processor attempts to calculate the split transaction amount using split.getSplitAmount().

Current code behavior:

BigDecimal percentage = new BigDecimal(split.getSplitAmount());

Since split_amount is coming as null, the payroll processor is unable to calculate the employee transaction split amount and the validation fails.

Expected configuration:

For employee configurations where:

"split_by": "Percentage"

the split_amount should be populated with a valid value. Based on the current business expectation, it should be either:

0 or 100

Invalid configuration observed:

"split_by": "Percentage",
"split_amount": null

Because the employee configuration is not valid, the payroll cannot be safely processed. Also, we are not keeping the payroll in a limbo or partially processed state. Since the validation error occurs during processing, the payroll is being cancelled in Gusto as part of the current handling flow.

This cancellation is intentional to avoid leaving the payroll in an inconsistent state between our processor and Gusto.

Requested action:

Please review the attached employee configuration details and validate why split_amount is coming as null for percentage-based split configurations.

Please confirm whether null is ever expected from the upstream/source system for split_by = Percentage.

If null is not expected, the employee configuration should be corrected at the source so that all percentage-based splits have a valid split_amount, preferably 0 or 100 as per the expected configuration rule.

If null is expected in any scenario, we need a clearly defined business rule on how the processor should interpret it before allowing the payroll to proceed.

Until this configuration issue is corrected or clarified, the payroll will continue to fail validation and will be cancelled in Gusto to prevent the payroll from remaining in a limbo state.

Thanks,
Kasi